>> Steve Kinney: So let's do kind of
a tour of what we've got going on here,
which is we've got an application
where most of our time
today is gonna be spent in the client and
the server folders.
Spoiler alert, one's an express app and
one's a react app is anything we're
talking about specific to express or
react per se, no, but it is kind of like,
I felt like the lowest common
denominator of things that like,
even if you don't write
react all day every day.
And again, we're not going to
touch a lot of the react code or
express all day every day,
you've probably seen enough of it before
to be at least somewhat familiar with it.
We're not actually going to touch too much
of the action framework code itself, but
we are just gonna have some stuff in
there to make it a little bit more real.
We've got a shared folder for stuff we
wanna share between the two of them and
then we have this like weird exercises
folder that shouldn't be in this repo, but
like making you download two
repos felt rude so it's here.
Which is where we're gonna start our life
together in this exercises,
Zod folder here,
where there are a bunch of little
exercises that definitely,
right now, need some schemas, right?
And so what we'll do is try
to get our hands dirty like,
listening to me talk about schemas any
longer seems egregiously terrible.
So why don't even if we're feeling like,
but I just learned about this,
I'm not ready to, we can do it.
I believe in you, also the answers
are like, right over here, and
I will go after like, I will do it
along with you in a second as well.
But like, you're not, you are in
a safe space to start playing around,
getting your hands dirty but
what we wanna do is we want to
take away the .todo here, right?
And we're gonna do good old fashioned,
test driven development,
where it will be a sea of red, and
we will seek to make it green and
we will get a sense of that
as we go along as well.
So from the main repo, like I said before,
there's a few, like, little kind of sub
folders between our client side
app that we'll play around with,
our server side app, some shared folder,
and this weird little exercise folder.
So what we'll do is we'll head in,
you know,
from the top I'll go into this exercises,
and then in there,
I've got this Zod set of exercises,
and out of the box,
if we just do NPM test,
not a lot happens in this case, right?
We've got some passing ones, but
the ones that we really want
are skip to this point up.
Pro tip, if you only wanna run one file,
you can kind of type in
some of the name of it,
so we can do exercises.test.
So right now, they're all skipped, which
is intentional, they are called .todo.
This is all the test, didn't blow up
because we haven't done anything yet.
So you can remove that, I put some little
mini ones in here, just to kind of like,
slow myself down, you can do that,
you cannot do that it's up to you, but
we'll kind of get each one
running one at a time.
So like I said, by definition,
this is going to fail because
one is not a zod schema at all.
And typescript has nothing to say
about it because you said that it's,
I said, we said, it was said that
we're gonna mark it as any, so
this code will legit blow up, right?
And in our test suite, any blow up
technically counts as a test failure,
so going ahead, I can kind of
take this first sweet here and
I'll remove the .todo, and we can see
it has blown up out of the box, right?
There are some that are expected
to blow up, right, so
we'll play that game in a second.
>> Steve Kinney: So basically, we wanna
see is our basic schema should have,
should be able to kind of work with
a type that has a name as a string and
age is nothing but a number, but
that number should be at least
a positive number, like you cannot
be negative five years old.
You can act like it, but you probably
can't be it, so let's write our first
odd schema together, which is, again,
we know this could be an object.
And in this case, we can say,
yeah, name is a string and
the age we can do, we have a few
options I'll show you a bunch.
Let's make sure this passes first, okay,
it passes so we can say number, and
we get a little bit more granularity
than TypeScript would normally give us,
because like in TypeScript,
there is a type four number.
That number could be a negative number, a
positive number, it could be 3.67, right?
So Zod does give us the ability to put
some additional checks on top of that.
So in this case, we can say it's a number,
it should be a whole number,
an integer, and
it should be positive, right?
Another way that you could do it,
you could say something like,
mean is zero so that will at least get
you to the positive number right again.
It all depends like, do you insist that
the age is an integer or not, right?
I don't, personally, if I'm going
with the assignment as given, like,
this technically fits the assignment,
but you could also do the INT.
Yeah, and these are kind of just,
as you can kind of see like
refinements on that initial number so
as we can see, they all pass,
and just to kind of show you,
I could say like type user z.infer,
and this is that utility type,
I can say type of,
>> Steve Kinney: And
so now if I look at this type, you can see
that I did a pretty good job of coming up
with the Typescript type out of the box.
All right, so our first initial,
we wrote our first odd schema,
we're killing it, we're doing great.
Awesome and so these all pass
we can go down to the next one.
Okay, so for my next one,
I want to have an optional number, right?
Okay, so let's go ahead and
get these failing, and
we'll look at two different
ways we can go about this, so
we can go ahead and again,
we know it's gonna be an object.
And we know the names can be a string,
so a few things you can do here.
That's a little more than I wanted for
the first pass in this case,
but I like it and
we're going to talk about it anyway.
So we're gonna say that name is a string,
number is again a positive integer,
In this case,
we can also say that it's optional, right?
And that if it doesn't exist, we do want
a default value to it, which is nice so
it's like if that is not on there,
maybe zero is a fine answer,
now the big question is like the logic of
whatever you're trying to implement that
is either the behavior you want or
not the behavior.
My job is just to show you that it's
an option and that you can do these kinds
of things, we do have a failing test,
let's see which one fails.
>> Steve Kinney: Interesting I have,
you know,
I'll show you the one that I did earlier,
too, right?
Because this is like the auto
complete one but this one we did not
get the default is zero, I'm curious
it has to do with the chain, or
what I have number min optional, default.
Number, min, optional, default, all right,
let's put it back in the middle there,
or the transform works too.
Hey, hey we learned all,
we all learned something together,
which is the order matters.
Cool, so
now not only did we achieve the core
part of having optional values in there,
we also learned a little bit
about the ordering along the way.
Cool, and so it goes through,
and it does all these things,
third challenge, this is one where
we can reference other ones as well.
One thing I do wanna show real
quick is again, I think I deleted
that other type so we can see again
what the type is in this case,
which you'll notice that it does
say that there is an age property
because we fill it in with a default,
right?
If I got rid of this.
>> Steve Kinney: You can see that now
it is actually an optional prop in
the type that was created as well, right?
Because whatever gets parsed, when you
have a default value, you would have
always got a number, so now TypeScript
is not gonna yell at you about like,
are you sure this number is possibly
undefined and you're like, no,
because I made a zero or
an object or whatever, so.
When doing this, would you create
your types in just that way?
It depends,
sometimes I already have the types, right?
And so which way, I have to go the other
direction if I don't have the types,
and yes, right?
But sometimes, it's like the types were
for like, when we're gonna look at like,
either open API slash swagger docs for
like,
that will generate an API like schema for
you.
Like, in some of those cases, you might
have the types from somewhere else, or you
might have, especially if you're sending
it to like, if you have the types of like,
a third party API or an SDK, or
something along those lines.
You might have the types,
but not the schemas,
if you don't have either,
then this will work, because,
again, like you know, and
you can write tests against it, right?
Are there ways to test types in like,
various testing frameworks, like V test?
Yes, does anyone do them?
No, do we more likely
test regular JavaScript?
Absolutely, so it depends is the answer?
[LAUGH] unfortunately,
which is the answer for a lot of things,
so awesome, so yeah,
then like having ones that refer to other
schemas like we kind of
talked about before.
So we can go ahead and
I kind of have at least the end state that
I'm looking for,
which is a person will have a name and
then they will have some
array of addresses, right?
And Typescripts or
Typescripts types are nice 'cause they
are at all just kind of hoisted and
stuff along those lines.
You do have to follow the rules of
JavaScript when writing JavaScript,
which is order matters, right?
You can't reference stuff
until it's defined,
there are ways to do it we'll talk
about it, but we're not there yet.
So an address schema seems
to have a city street, zip,
apartment number that's optional.
So we can kind of play with some
various options here as well, so
we've got this object street part is easy,
the city part is easy.
As you can see, you can say as
a string with a length of 5 you can
then also provide a reject to make sure
that it's like 5 numbers, right as well.
Which is nice because like you can't
really do that in typescriopt?
You can say it should be 5 numbers for
those numbers could be lots and
lots of digits, so like to say five
actual digits is kinda nice as well.
And here we wanna say that it's optional,
and again you will get a type but
the nice part is one schema can very very
very easily reference another schema.
So in this case, we can say that
a user profile is a object, and
it's gonna have the name,
that's a string and
then an array, but you can see,
I'm just referencing the one address.
I could just literally say that
address was, like, legit just point to
the schema and like, those nested
objects will all just work, right?
So if you find yourself,
you can reuse stuff,
you can kind of compose one thing out
of another, so on and so forth, right?
And so we go through, we make sure it
doesn't throw as we validate the things,
so on and so forth.
If we add one where it's that,
like too many numbers in it, or
in this case too many obviously
it will fail, so on and so forth.
Cool, moving on to this
idea of like a union and so
in this case, right,
like we want to either the string
literal anonymous or
an ID and a name, right?
And so in this case, we could make
this one thing or not it's up to us.
I'm actually gonna break it up into two
just to make my point, anonymous schema.
This way it could be a literal so it's
like we're not saying that it's a string
or an object, we're saying it
is literally the word anonymous.
Or one of these other objects, I can
make that anonymous schema as well and
then for the user identity,
I can do something like, actually, let's
do a user schema as well and a different
way of doing this is the answers but
I've decided I hate myself and
that I'm going to live code.
And be a cowboy about this, so
here we'll say that the ID is a number and
the name is a string, and so
what we could do in this case is
literally say that this is
a union between those two, right.
And again,
I've got to make sure I delete these so
they don't conflict, but I think I'm good.
Now, if we look at this,
it is either, that's user schema.
I want user identity schema so
it's either the string
anonymous or
the things I'm expecting it to be.